README.md, before:

# KAIST CS350 Intro. to Software Engineering, Fall '25

## Announcement
- Nov 17: No class on Nov 19. Instead, I will upload a makeup lecture movie for Nov 19th class by tonight so that you can start Safehome implementation early. 
- Nov 12: Dec 3 (Wed) class will be an offline class, not an online class.
- Nov 3: We do not have a class on Dec 1. Instead of a makeup class, we will extend class hour by 10 min.
- Oct 13: We do not have a midterm exam.  We will have a class on Oct 20 (Mon), but not on Oct 22 (Wed) due to possible conflict w/ exams of other classes.
- Sep 22: Sep 24 (Wed) Zoom class will start from 1:15 pm (not 1:00 pm).
- Sep 10: Slack channel is now open for helping the students to make his/her team through communication.  Please, read [the description on how to use the Slack channel](Team%20Project%20Announcement.pdf).
  
[https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e7268af2-81f8-4023-9c42-3c930cf45881](https://join.slack.com/t/cs350-fall-2025/shared_invite/zt-3cyod61b7-Y5Rlr9nI7YDr1SnUaEx4CA)

- Sep 10: No class on Sep 22. A makeup lecture movie will be uploaded instead.
- Aug 25: I added pre-requites of this class in the course home page.  If you think that you do not satisfy the pre-requites, please do not register this class.
 
## Administrative Information

- Instructor: [Prof. Moonzoo Kim](https://swtv.kaist.ac.kr/members/mzkim)

  - Office: E3-1 Rm# 2434 (located at the east wing of E3-1)
  - Phone: 042-350-3543
  - E-mail: moonzoo.kim @ gmail.com
  - Office hour: Mon 14:30-15:30 PM (reservation e-mail is preferred)

- Teaching assistants: Sechang Jang (newwin0198@gmail.com) 

- Lecture hours: Mon/Wed 13:00-14:30   

- Lecture room: E3-1 Information & Electronics B/D RM# 1101(and through Zoom)
  - a face-to-face lecture on Mon and an online lecture on Wed (this plan may change later) 
  - Zoom link for Thurs class: https://kaist.zoom.us/j/5258253316

<!--
- Recommended prerequisite: CS230 System Programming, proficiency in C/C++ programming and Linux utilities
  - Due to the high load of TA, TA will not provide help for basic C/C++/Linux questions.
  - This class can be difficult to follow for exchange students.
   hly recommend to take CS458 after taking CS230 System Programming first -->
  
- Pre-requites:  
  - CS.20300 System Programming, CS.20200 Programming Principles
  - I do not recommend students in non-SoC majors to take this class for its heavy class workload (HW, team project, **a large amount of documentation**, etc.).
  - Also, freshmen students (whose student IDs are 2025xxxx) are not eligible to take this 3rd year class for their insufficient technical communication skills required in team projects. 

- Grading: attendance/class participation/quiz: 20%, HW and project: 30%, mid/final exams: 50%
  - You should turn on your web cam when you participate an online class; class attendance will not be counted otherwise.
  - More than 7 absences of the class will get F grade
  - Late attendance shall be counted as 1/3 absence. If a student is not able to attend a class due to an important event (e.g., attending conf., etc.), he/she should submit 1 week prior notice to the professor.
  - The official language in the class is English. All students should submit all written documents such as homework, project reports, exam, etc. in English; 20% penalty of the max score otherwise.  

- Homework:
  - Homework should be submitted through KLMS  
    - Hint: many questions of exams are from the homeworks.
  - Late HW will be accepted with 10% penalty of the max score in 1 day, 30% penalty of the max score in 3 days. HW will not be accepted after then.
  - All programming HWs you submit must be able to be replayed by executing a single script file on a TA's server account (i.e., submitted HW should not have a dependency on your home directory, environment, etc.).  Also, the replayed execution must demonstrate the same output to the submitted hw. You will get 10% penalty of the max score otherwise.
  - Please, include your student ID in the name of your submiited file(s), so that TAs can easily identify which files are yours.
  
    
- [Online exam instruction for students w/ COVID-19](online-exam-instructions-v2.pdf)


## Syllabus
This course provides students with basic concepts in software engineering to develop high-quality software economically. The key concepts include software process models, software modeling and design methods, software testing techniques, project management concepts, and software metrics.

Also, students are expected to experience how to apply LLM (large language model) like ChatGpt to improve efficiency of various software development tasks such as documentation, code development, test code generation, and so on.

- Roger S. Pressman, and Bruce R. Maxim, Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach, 9th Ed., McGraw Hill, 2019
- Bernd Bruegge and Allen H. Dutoit, Object-Oriented Software Engineering Using UML, Patterns, and Java, 3rd Ed., Prentice Hall Press, 2009
- 소프트웨어 공학 이론과 실제 (홍장의), 한빛아카데미, 2022
- Reading materials will be available on the class homepage

## Course Schedule

- Sep 1: [Introduction 1/3- What is Software Engineering](slides/lec1-intro-to-SE1.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec1-intro-to-SE1.pdf)

<!--  Feb 28 : <a href="part2-coverage/lec1-Intro-AutomatedSWAnalysis_v11.pptx" download> Introduction2 </a> -->

- Sep 3: [Introduction 2/3- Tragedic Accident caused by Software Failures](slides/lec2-1.intro-to-SE2.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec2-1.intro-to-SE2.pdf)

[Introduction 3/3- High Complexity of Software](slides/lec2-2.Intro-HighComplexitySW_v8.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec2-2.Intro-HighComplexitySW_v8.pdf)

  
- Sep 8: [Overview of Software Engineering](slides/lec3-se_overview.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec3-se_overview.pdf)

- Sep 10, 15:  [Ch1.Software and Software Engineering](slides/lec4-ch1-v2.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec4-ch1-v2.pdf)

- Sep 15:  [Ch2.Process Models-part1](slides/lec5-ch2-v2.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec5-ch2-v2.pdf)

- Sep 17: [Ch2.Process Models-part2](slides/lec5_ch2_prof.koh.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec5_ch2_prof.koh.pdf)


[Ch3.Agility and Process part 1](slides/lec6_ch3_part1.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec6_ch3_part1.pdf)

[Questions and Answers in SEPA 9th ed](slides/ch2-solution.doc)

- Sep 22: No class 

- Sep 24: [Ch3.Agility and Process part 2](slides/lec7_ch3_part2.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec7_ch3_part2.pdf)

- Sep 29: [Ch7.Understanding Requirements](slides/lec8_ch7.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec8_ch7.pdf)
  
- Oct 1: [Ch8.Requirements Modeling](slides/lec9_ch8.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec9_ch8.pdf)

[Dialogs on the Safehome development in CPI co.](slides/safehome_dialog.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/safehome_dialog.pdf)

- Oct 13, 15: [Technical Tutorial – UML](slides/lec11-UML_Tutorial.pptx)
[[pdf]](slides/lec11-UML_Tutorial.pdf) 

- Oct 20: Safehome project guideline
  
#### HW#1: Writing requirement specification for the Safehome product (deadline: Oct 31 midnight)
  - [LLM for UML diagram](slides/LLMforUML.pdf)

- Oct 27: [Wrap-up for the 1st half semester: requirement-to-analysis-to-design](slides/lec13_wrapup_half_semester.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec13_wrapup_half_semester.pdf)

- OCt 29: [Design Principles](slides/lec14_design_principles.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec14_design_principles.pdf) 

- Nov 3: Safehome software requirement spec. review meeting (SRR)

- Nov 5: [Software Metrics and Analytics](slides/lec15-ch23-design-metrics.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec15-ch23-design-metrics.pdf)

- Nov 10: [Design Modeling - Architectural Patterns](slides/lec16_architectures.pptx)  [[pdf]](slides/lec16_architectures.pdf)

- Nov 12: [Software Quality Assurance](slides/lec19_SQA.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec19_SQA.pdf)


#### HW#2: Writing design specification for the Safehome product (deadline: Nov 14 midnight) 

- Nov 17: Safehome design review meeting (CDR)
  
- Nov 19: [Software engineering principles](slides/lec20-ch6-principles.pptx)  [[pdf]](slides/lec20-ch6-principles.pdf) [(Lecture movie file)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Dtvtf2wOo6VFjUuo6mrHP50z2t8LFOlW/view)

[Practical guidelines for tests through safehome example](slides/lec20-test-example_v1.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec20-test-example_v1.pdf) 
[(Lecture movie file)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1GriOgPIIBXYrRiM9yrRDfMeG-7LhE0Ut/view?usp=drive_link)

[Pytest and coverage.py](slides/lec20-testing-pythoncode_v3.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec20-testing-pythoncode_v3.pdf) [(Lecture movie file)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1NOAKkP3b1QkEuY8rCmTl2Uj6IgsiAIY9/view?usp=drive_link)

- Nov 24: 
[Overview of SW testing 1](slides/lec21-ch11-testing-OOSE.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec21-ch11-testing-OOSE.pdf) (asking a permission to use the slides of Dr. Bernd Brügge)

[Overview of SW testing 2- Black box vs White box](slides/lec22-testing-overview-v3.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec22-testing-overview-v3.pdf)

- Nov 26:[Overview of SW testing 3- Fight against high complexity of SW](slides/lec22.Intro-HighComplexitySW_v8.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec22.Intro-HighComplexitySW_v8.pdf)

- Dec 1: No class

#### HW#3: Implementing and testing Safehome implementation (deadline: Dec 1 midnight)   

- Dec 3: Safehome implementation review meeting (offline class)

#### HW#4: Testing the Safehome implementations of the other teams (deadline: Dec 8 midnight)  

- Dec 8: [Static analyzer for bug detection](slides/lec24-static-analyzer.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec24-static-analyzer.pdf)

[20 GUI Testing Tools](https://www.functionize.com/automated-testing/gui-testing-tools)

quiz (open book) and Q&A for the final exam.
  

<!--- [Whitebox vs blackbox testing]() [[pdf]]() [Graph coverage testing]() [[pdf]]() [Logic coverage testing]() [[pdf]]() --->


- Dec 10: Safehome test review meeting (TRR) 

- Dec 15: Final exam

#### HW#5: Final Safehome project submission (deadline: Dec 20 midnight) ####

- Dec 22: Final project presentation (all teams will present their results)

<!---
### Part IV: Testing/Verification Engine - SAT/SMT Solver
- June 1: [Using SAT solver for Sudoku](5-smt/lec44-sudoku-v2.pptx) [[pdf]](5-smt/lec44-sudoku-v2.pdf), Q&A for the final exam, LLVM IR basics, CLANG vs LLVM
  - "Sudoku as a SAT problem" by I.Lynce and J.Ouaknine, Intl. Symp. on Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics 2006
  - The SuDoku Puzzle as a Satisfiability Problem
--->

Commit message:

Update README with new testing paper and exam details
Added a new reference to a paper on mobile GUI testing and updated the final exam quiz description.

README.md, after:

# KAIST CS350 Intro. to Software Engineering, Fall '25

## Announcement
- Nov 17: No class on Nov 19. Instead, I will upload a makeup lecture movie for Nov 19th class by tonight so that you can start Safehome implementation early. 
- Nov 12: Dec 3 (Wed) class will be an offline class, not an online class.
- Nov 3: We do not have a class on Dec 1. Instead of a makeup class, we will extend class hour by 10 min.
- Oct 13: We do not have a midterm exam.  We will have a class on Oct 20 (Mon), but not on Oct 22 (Wed) due to possible conflict w/ exams of other classes.
- Sep 22: Sep 24 (Wed) Zoom class will start from 1:15 pm (not 1:00 pm).
- Sep 10: Slack channel is now open for helping the students to make his/her team through communication.  Please, read [the description on how to use the Slack channel](Team%20Project%20Announcement.pdf).
  
[https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e7268af2-81f8-4023-9c42-3c930cf45881](https://join.slack.com/t/cs350-fall-2025/shared_invite/zt-3cyod61b7-Y5Rlr9nI7YDr1SnUaEx4CA)

- Sep 10: No class on Sep 22. A makeup lecture movie will be uploaded instead.
- Aug 25: I added pre-requites of this class in the course home page.  If you think that you do not satisfy the pre-requites, please do not register this class.
 
## Administrative Information

- Instructor: [Prof. Moonzoo Kim](https://swtv.kaist.ac.kr/members/mzkim)

  - Office: E3-1 Rm# 2434 (located at the east wing of E3-1)
  - Phone: 042-350-3543
  - E-mail: moonzoo.kim @ gmail.com
  - Office hour: Mon 14:30-15:30 PM (reservation e-mail is preferred)

- Teaching assistants: Sechang Jang (newwin0198@gmail.com) 

- Lecture hours: Mon/Wed 13:00-14:30   

- Lecture room: E3-1 Information & Electronics B/D RM# 1101(and through Zoom)
  - a face-to-face lecture on Mon and an online lecture on Wed (this plan may change later) 
  - Zoom link for Thurs class: https://kaist.zoom.us/j/5258253316

<!--
- Recommended prerequisite: CS230 System Programming, proficiency in C/C++ programming and Linux utilities
  - Due to the high load of TA, TA will not provide help for basic C/C++/Linux questions.
  - This class can be difficult to follow for exchange students.
   hly recommend to take CS458 after taking CS230 System Programming first -->
  
- Pre-requites:  
  - CS.20300 System Programming, CS.20200 Programming Principles
  - I do not recommend students in non-SoC majors to take this class for its heavy class workload (HW, team project, **a large amount of documentation**, etc.).
  - Also, freshmen students (whose student IDs are 2025xxxx) are not eligible to take this 3rd year class for their insufficient technical communication skills required in team projects. 

- Grading: attendance/class participation/quiz: 20%, HW and project: 30%, mid/final exams: 50%
  - You should turn on your web cam when you participate an online class; class attendance will not be counted otherwise.
  - More than 7 absences of the class will get F grade
  - Late attendance shall be counted as 1/3 absence. If a student is not able to attend a class due to an important event (e.g., attending conf., etc.), he/she should submit 1 week prior notice to the professor.
  - The official language in the class is English. All students should submit all written documents such as homework, project reports, exam, etc. in English; 20% penalty of the max score otherwise.  

- Homework:
  - Homework should be submitted through KLMS  
    - Hint: many questions of exams are from the homeworks.
  - Late HW will be accepted with 10% penalty of the max score in 1 day, 30% penalty of the max score in 3 days. HW will not be accepted after then.
  - All programming HWs you submit must be able to be replayed by executing a single script file on a TA's server account (i.e., submitted HW should not have a dependency on your home directory, environment, etc.).  Also, the replayed execution must demonstrate the same output to the submitted hw. You will get 10% penalty of the max score otherwise.
  - Please, include your student ID in the name of your submiited file(s), so that TAs can easily identify which files are yours.
  
    
- [Online exam instruction for students w/ COVID-19](online-exam-instructions-v2.pdf)


## Syllabus
This course provides students with basic concepts in software engineering to develop high-quality software economically. The key concepts include software process models, software modeling and design methods, software testing techniques, project management concepts, and software metrics.

Also, students are expected to experience how to apply LLM (large language model) like ChatGpt to improve efficiency of various software development tasks such as documentation, code development, test code generation, and so on.

- Roger S. Pressman, and Bruce R. Maxim, Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach, 9th Ed., McGraw Hill, 2019
- Bernd Bruegge and Allen H. Dutoit, Object-Oriented Software Engineering Using UML, Patterns, and Java, 3rd Ed., Prentice Hall Press, 2009
- 소프트웨어 공학 이론과 실제 (홍장의), 한빛아카데미, 2022
- Reading materials will be available on the class homepage

## Course Schedule

- Sep 1: [Introduction 1/3- What is Software Engineering](slides/lec1-intro-to-SE1.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec1-intro-to-SE1.pdf)

<!--  Feb 28 : <a href="part2-coverage/lec1-Intro-AutomatedSWAnalysis_v11.pptx" download> Introduction2 </a> -->

- Sep 3: [Introduction 2/3- Tragedic Accident caused by Software Failures](slides/lec2-1.intro-to-SE2.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec2-1.intro-to-SE2.pdf)

[Introduction 3/3- High Complexity of Software](slides/lec2-2.Intro-HighComplexitySW_v8.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec2-2.Intro-HighComplexitySW_v8.pdf)

  
- Sep 8: [Overview of Software Engineering](slides/lec3-se_overview.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec3-se_overview.pdf)

- Sep 10, 15:  [Ch1.Software and Software Engineering](slides/lec4-ch1-v2.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec4-ch1-v2.pdf)

- Sep 15:  [Ch2.Process Models-part1](slides/lec5-ch2-v2.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec5-ch2-v2.pdf)

- Sep 17: [Ch2.Process Models-part2](slides/lec5_ch2_prof.koh.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec5_ch2_prof.koh.pdf)


[Ch3.Agility and Process part 1](slides/lec6_ch3_part1.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec6_ch3_part1.pdf)

[Questions and Answers in SEPA 9th ed](slides/ch2-solution.doc)

- Sep 22: No class 

- Sep 24: [Ch3.Agility and Process part 2](slides/lec7_ch3_part2.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec7_ch3_part2.pdf)

- Sep 29: [Ch7.Understanding Requirements](slides/lec8_ch7.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec8_ch7.pdf)
  
- Oct 1: [Ch8.Requirements Modeling](slides/lec9_ch8.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec9_ch8.pdf)

[Dialogs on the Safehome development in CPI co.](slides/safehome_dialog.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/safehome_dialog.pdf)

- Oct 13, 15: [Technical Tutorial – UML](slides/lec11-UML_Tutorial.pptx)
[[pdf]](slides/lec11-UML_Tutorial.pdf) 

- Oct 20: Safehome project guideline
  
#### HW#1: Writing requirement specification for the Safehome product (deadline: Oct 31 midnight)
  - [LLM for UML diagram](slides/LLMforUML.pdf)

- Oct 27: [Wrap-up for the 1st half semester: requirement-to-analysis-to-design](slides/lec13_wrapup_half_semester.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec13_wrapup_half_semester.pdf)

- OCt 29: [Design Principles](slides/lec14_design_principles.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec14_design_principles.pdf) 

- Nov 3: Safehome software requirement spec. review meeting (SRR)

- Nov 5: [Software Metrics and Analytics](slides/lec15-ch23-design-metrics.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec15-ch23-design-metrics.pdf)

- Nov 10: [Design Modeling - Architectural Patterns](slides/lec16_architectures.pptx)  [[pdf]](slides/lec16_architectures.pdf)

- Nov 12: [Software Quality Assurance](slides/lec19_SQA.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec19_SQA.pdf)


#### HW#2: Writing design specification for the Safehome product (deadline: Nov 14 midnight) 

- Nov 17: Safehome design review meeting (CDR)
  
- Nov 19: [Software engineering principles](slides/lec20-ch6-principles.pptx)  [[pdf]](slides/lec20-ch6-principles.pdf) [(Lecture movie file)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Dtvtf2wOo6VFjUuo6mrHP50z2t8LFOlW/view)

[Practical guidelines for tests through safehome example](slides/lec20-test-example_v1.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec20-test-example_v1.pdf) 
[(Lecture movie file)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1GriOgPIIBXYrRiM9yrRDfMeG-7LhE0Ut/view?usp=drive_link)

[Pytest and coverage.py](slides/lec20-testing-pythoncode_v3.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec20-testing-pythoncode_v3.pdf) [(Lecture movie file)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1NOAKkP3b1QkEuY8rCmTl2Uj6IgsiAIY9/view?usp=drive_link)

- Nov 24: 
[Overview of SW testing 1](slides/lec21-ch11-testing-OOSE.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec21-ch11-testing-OOSE.pdf) (asking a permission to use the slides of Dr. Bernd Brügge)

[Overview of SW testing 2- Black box vs White box](slides/lec22-testing-overview-v3.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec22-testing-overview-v3.pdf)

- Nov 26:[Overview of SW testing 3- Fight against high complexity of SW](slides/lec22.Intro-HighComplexitySW_v8.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec22.Intro-HighComplexitySW_v8.pdf)

- Dec 1: No class

#### HW#3: Implementing and testing Safehome implementation (deadline: Dec 1 midnight)   

- Dec 3: Safehome implementation review meeting (offline class)

#### HW#4: Testing the Safehome implementations of the other teams (deadline: Dec 8 midnight)  

- Dec 8: [Static analyzer for bug detection](slides/lec24-static-analyzer.pptx) [[pdf]](slides/lec24-static-analyzer.pdf)

[20 GUI Testing Tools](https://www.functionize.com/automated-testing/gui-testing-tools)

[Intent-Driven Mobile GUI Testing with Autonomous Large Language Model Agents](https://coinse.github.io/publications/pdfs/Yoon2024aa.pdf)

quiz (open book) 
  

<!--- [Whitebox vs blackbox testing]() [[pdf]]() [Graph coverage testing]() [[pdf]]() [Logic coverage testing]() [[pdf]]() --->


- Dec 10: Safehome test review meeting (TRR) and Q&A for the final exam.

- Dec 15: Final exam

#### HW#5: Final Safehome project submission (deadline: Dec 20 midnight) ####

- Dec 22: Final project presentation (all teams will present their results)

<!---
### Part IV: Testing/Verification Engine - SAT/SMT Solver
- June 1: [Using SAT solver for Sudoku](5-smt/lec44-sudoku-v2.pptx) [[pdf]](5-smt/lec44-sudoku-v2.pdf), Q&A for the final exam, LLVM IR basics, CLANG vs LLVM
  - "Sudoku as a SAT problem" by I.Lynce and J.Ouaknine, Intl. Symp. on Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics 2006
  - The SuDoku Puzzle as a Satisfiability Problem
--->
